Source: Everyday spy

Here is how you hack the job interview:

Perceptive People
The human mind sees its own perceptions as reality.

As a result, people trust their own opinions over objective fact. You see this all around you - in politics, sports, gambling and even family debates.

The same way that your parents defend their parenting, hiring managers never question their interviewing skills.

They honestly believe they are excellent at assessing talent. Even though psychologists have proven that personal interviews are inherently flawed.

In 2012, psychologists from the University of Pennsylvania and Carnegie Mellon University conducted an experiment to test the accuracy of human interviews.

76 students were assessed in two groups:

38 students based on objective GPA performance and educational background only
38 students based on objective GPA/educational background PLUS a subjective human interview by and expert.
The goal was to see which assessment method (objective only vs. objective + interview) best predicted future GPA performance.

The results were overwhelming.

Human interviews dramatically misjudged student performance when compared against objective assessments.

Interviewers thought they were experts - in students, in grading, in human assessment. But instead they were flawed by their opinions, preferences and assumptions.

And they chose wrong.

The people choosing who to hire and who to pass over are unwittingly limiting their own talent pool.

So if you get passed over, keep in mind it may not be your fault. Your performance can be excellent even though you don’t get the ‘reward.’

The Unstructured Script
HR hiring managers in professional corporations always use an interview script.

This script is supposed to offset known biases that come about during unstructured, free-form interviews. By ‘scripting’ interview questions, hiring managers are supposed to have a more objective, fair perspective when assessing prospective hires.

But scripted questions drive unscripted responses from the candidates themselves.

And once a candidate gives an unexpected answer, the interviewer has to go off-script to ask follow-up questions. That means objective assessment is gone and subjective assessment is back in control.

Since we know that people are ruled by their perceptions, your first big interview advantage happens when your interviewer starts asking unscripted questions.

Unscripted questions are a signal that the interviewer is no longer in control. Their natural curiosity and emotions are in control of them.

Your work performance doesn’t matter to them right now. Logic is out the window.

Your interviewer is looking for you to make them ‘feel good.’

They want you to show them what they want to see; tell them what they want to hear. Just like those 38 students made their interviewers ‘feel good’ about their future GPA performance.

It’s not about reality at this point in the interview - it’s about perception.

And the thing every interviewer wants to see in a potential hire… is themselves.


Mirror Effect
Our brains are cognitively wired to prefer people who are similar to us.

There are multiple innate biases that prove this fact: confirmation bias, in-group bias, self-serving bias, bandwagon effect, etc.

Recognizing that we are attracted to people like us, it is easy to understand that...

Hiring managers prefer to hire employees who remind them of themselves.

While hundreds of would-be applicants submit neatly formatted resumes, dress in matching dark suits, and reuse the same ‘final question’ about growth opportunity and 5 year challenges, the fact is that managers don’t remember any of that.

They remember that one candidate who, ‘reminds me of me, when I was their age…’

Hiring statistics show that job seekers are good at being interviewed:

The corporate average of ‘good’ job interviews to job placement is 3:1.
In skilled professions like IT or customer service, there are 6 ‘good’ interviews for every 1 job placement.
In client-facing roles like sales and account management, there are as many as 8 ‘good’ interviews for every 1 job placement.
So how does that ‘1’ candidate get chosen among 3, 6, or even 8 other talented, promising candidates?

They mirror the interviewer.

Mirroring happens when you sit like the interviewer sits; if they wear a wedding ring, you talk about your spouse; if they have a picture of their family in the office, you talk about your family.

If your interviewer looks tired, you highlight your dedication to working long hours.
If your interviewer acts strict, you highlight your appreciation for discipline and structure.
If your interviewer is dressed well, you compliment their clothes (appropriately!) and if they have no idea about fashion you joke about people who get gussied up.
Hiring managers have seen dozens of interviewees talk about their technical skills, interpersonal communication, and passion for excellence.

They met them, shook their hands, and promptly forgot about them.

But you can mirror them; you can remind them of themselves.

And they will remember you.

And you will get the job…